[Music]
you might think that the times of the
Titanic are long gone but what if I told
you that less than 20 years ago there
was another ship that almost followed in
the steps of the infamous passenger
liner this time
abandoned by their captain around 600
passengers would have lost their lives
if not for the quick thinking and
courageous cruise ship entertainers the
Oceanus built in France and first
launched in July 1952 was a Greek owned
cruise ship that traveled along the
Marseilles Madagascar Mauritius route on
August 3rd 1991 after a serious delay it
set off from East London South Africa on
its fateful voyage toward Durban the
captain of the Oceanos was experienced
seaman be honest ever honest who had
been sailing the oceans for 30 years
including 20 years as an officer even
before the journey started the ship had
already started to wear with holes in
its walls loose hull plates and missing
parts that control the flow of water it
looked pretty neglected but let's get
back to the moment of departure usually
the ship's crew would have organized a
sail away party with the entertainers
and musicians on the deck outside but
everything seemed to be going wrong this
time the sea was incredibly rough
causing the party to take place inside
in the Four Seasons lounge even so most
passengers were unwilling to leave their
cabins during such a powerful storm but
soon things got even worse several hours
into the dinner party the waiters could
hardly balance their trays without
dropping something at one terrifying
moment plates glasses and cutlery
started to slide off the tables people
couldn't stand straight any longer and
potted plants decorating the lounge
began to fall over the problem was that
in an attempt to make up for the
previous delay the Oceanus entered rough
seats but it turned out to be a fatal
mistake first of all the ship's waste
disposal system was still under repair
meaning that several essential parts
hadn't been replaced yet secondly the
ship wasn't only stuck in a violent
storm no the situation was much much
more dangerous because the Oceano s--
encountered rogue waves also called
monster waves they're incredibly large
and unexpected they appear all of a
sudden and can wreck even large ships
and ocean liners so with these dangerous
waves slamming against the ship it's no
wonder that its shell plating eventually
gave in and burst open sea water started
to fill the ship's engine room at
lightning speed and since the rising
water could have easily short-circuited
the generators they were immediately
switched off the Oceano s-- lost power
and was rolling adrift on the waves most
of the passengers who were still unaware
of the looming disaster but they're
ignorant wasn't going to last the ship
was sinking slowly but surely the main
lights went out replaced by the
emergency once the ship turned dark with
only public areas dimly lit the ocean
water was flooding the ship through the
main drainage pipes which meant that it
was uncontrollably spilling out of
toilets showers and the water disposal
system
now you'd probably assume that upon
hearing such dramatic news the crew
immediately informed the passengers and
started the evacuation process not this
time
on board the sinking Oceanos it just
didn't happen as soon as the crew
realized that the ship was beyond hope
and couldn't be saved they got ready to
abandon it they didn't follow the
standard procedure of locking the
portholes on the lower decks and they
even failed to raise the alarm
as a result the passengers remained in
the dark until the water began to flood
the lower decks those who finally
noticed the horrifying situation rushed
to the bridge in search of the crew but
discovered that it was unmanned a few
witnesses later reported that they saw
the captain along with some other crew
members all packed and ready to abandon
ship
ever heard about the seaman's rule which
states that the captain is the last
person to leave the ship if it's sinking
what's more if he's unable to evacuate
the passengers and his crew he shouldn't
save his own life even if he can't well
so much for this noble tradition on the
Oceanos the captain and his crew weren't
going to save the day they departed on
several lifeboats without looking back
luckily the ship still had its
entertainers
before the disaster struck all the
passengers had gathered in the main
lounge to see the 10:00 p.m. show
however they were getting more and more
alarmed because something strange was
happening on the ship
moss hills performed on the Oceano s--
as a singer and guitarist he could tell
that the ship was having a problem
but at that time he hadn't realized yet
how serious the situation was for the
time being he decided to keep
entertaining guests to prevent panic and
keep them calm since there was no
electricity onboard
none of the microphones or speakers
worked in the dimness of the emergency
lights the performer played his acoustic
guitar and sang along with it but the
passengers kept asking what was going on
in between the songs having run out of
plausible explanations and any other
ways to entertain the nervous people
Hills left to investigate later Hill
said that the captain denied that the
ship was sinking but at the same time
told them to prepare for an evacuation
it sounded strange and Hills together
with his fellow entertainer Julian
Butler made their way to the crew only
area to find out the real story the dark
ship was rolling violently oily
stairways were incredibly difficult to
climb but eventually the duo reached the
very bottom of Oceanos to their surprise
they discovered that the deck was indeed
dry they kept searching for signs of
water but found none Hills and Butler
had nothing to do but to return to the
upper deck as they got there they saw
that several lifeboats had already been
lowered and children and women were
getting inside but to their shock the
entertainers also noticed that senior
officers were climbing into the boats as
well and no one seemed to be in charge
of the situation
Hills got even more suspicious and
headed for the lower decks again this
time alone as soon as he neared the
engine room he heard the sound of raging
water the man turned a corner and his
worst fears were confirmed the ship was
sinking as soon as Hills realized the
horror of the situation as well as the
fact that they couldn't expect any help
from the panicking crew he sprang into
action together with his wife Tracey and
their colleagues Robyn Bultman and
Julian Butler they started to assist the
passengers Hills kept broadcasting a
made a distress call via the radio phone
until their cry for help was answered
the South African Air Force and the
South African Navy sent 16 rescue
helicopters that were to arrive at any
moment on top of that the Dutch
container ship nell lloyd mauritius also
responded to the Oceanos distress call
and rushed to help later its lifeboats
played a significant role in evacuating
the passengers from the sinking ship
meanwhile moss hills organized an
orderly evacuation process where
children and women were the first to use
the remaining lifeboats unfortunately
since the ship had already been lying on
its right side by that time the
passengers couldn't use all the boats
that were on board
luckily the helicopters arrived just in
time to airlift the 225 people remaining
on the ship with the help of safety
harnesses once again the entertainer's
insisted that children and women had to
be rescued first after that everyone was
taken to a nearby town around 6 miles
away all 571 people who were on board
the ship after the crew abandon it were
saved
moss and Tracey hills as well as Butler
and Bultman were among the last to leave
the ship Bultman later said that the
captain contacted him in the morning for
Schorr to find out how the evacuation
was going at about 3:30 p.m. the next
day the Oceanos touched the sand bottom
300 feet below the ocean's surface the
last minutes of its sinking were
recorded on video and broadcast by ABC
News nowadays the ship's wreck lies
around three miles away from the shore
Wow have you heard of any other stories
where someone's courage and dedication
saved human lives let me know down in
the comments if you learned something
new today then give this video a like
and share it with a friend but hey don't
get into that lifeboat just yet
we have over 2,000 cool videos for you
to check out all you have to do is pick
the left or right video click on it and
enjoy stay on the bright side of life